Expanded "Callables" chapter to include additional details. (#1723)
python/typing: docs/spec/callables.rst

Callables
=========

Terminology
-----------

In this section, and throughout this specification, the term  "parameter"
refers to a named symbol associated with a function that accepts the value of
an argument (or multiple arguments) passed to the function. The term
"argument" refers to a value passed to a function when it is called.

> In Python, parameters fall into one of three categories: positional-only,

Reviewer: I would say there are five, aligning with https://docs.python.org/3.10/library/inspect.html#inspect.Parameter.kind. It's mostly a matter of semantics, but I think it's better if we use the same definitions as the runtime inspect module. Below you already have separate sections for `*args` and `**kwargs`, consistent with seeing them as separate kinds.

the name, kind, optional declared type, and whether it has a default
argument value) plus its return type. The signature of the function above is
``(a: str, /, b, *args, c=..., **kwargs) -> None``. Note that the default
argument value for parameter ``c`` is denoted as ``...`` here because the
presence of a default value is considered part of the signature, but the
specific value is not.

The term "input signature" is used to refer to only the inputs of a function.
In the example above, the input signature is ``(a: str, /, b, *args, c=..., **kwargs)``.

Positional-only parameters
--------------------------

Within a function signature, positional-only parameters are separated from
non-positional-only parameters by a single forward slash ('/'). This
forward slash does not represent a parameter, but rather a delimiter. In this
example, ``a`` is a positional-only parameter and ``b`` is a standard
(positional or keyword) parameter::

    def func(a: int, /, b: int) -> None:
        ...

    func(1, 2)  # OK
    func(1, b=2)  # OK
    func(a=1, b=2)  # Error

Support for the ``/`` delimiter was introduced in Python 3.8 (:pep:`570`).

> Prior to Python 3.8, positional parameters were specified using a :ref:`naming
> convention <pos-only-double-underscore>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For compatibility with earlier versions of Python, the type system also
supports specifying positional-only parameters using a :ref:`naming
convention <pos-only-double-underscore>`.
```
Nitpick: The convention is still supported, and the convention is not part of Python itself but only of the type system.

list of parameter types. This indicates that the type is consistent with
any input signature::

    cb1: Callable[..., str]
    cb1 = lambda x: str(x)  # OK
    cb1 = lambda : ""  # OK

    cb2: Callable[[], str] = cb1  # OK

The input signature ``(...)`` is not the same as ``(*args: Any, **kwargs: Any)``.
The former is a gradual type form that is consistent with all input signatures,
and all input signatures are consistent with it. The latter is not a gradual
type form. It is consistent with all input signatures, but the converse is
not true. The relationship between ``(...)`` and ``(*args: Any, **kwargs: Any)``
is similar to the relationship between ``Any`` and ``object``. Just as ``Any``
means "any conceivable type that could be compatible", ``(...)`` means "any
conceivable set of parameters that could be compatible".

The ``...`` syntax can also be used to provide a :ref:`specialized value for a
ParamSpec <paramspec_valid_use_locations>` in a generic class or type alias.
For example::

    type Callback[**P] = Callable[P, str]

    def func(cb: Callable[[], str]) -> None:
        f: Callback[...] = cb  # OK

> If ``...`` is used with signature concatenation, the ``...`` portion continues
> to mean "any conceivable set of parameters that could be compatible"::
> 
>     type CallbackWithInt[**P] = Callable[Concatenate[int, P], str]
>     type CallbackWithStr[**P] = Callable[Concatenate[str, P], str]
> 
>     def func(cb: Callable[[int, str], str]) -> None:
>         f1: CallbackWithInt[...] = cb  # OK
>         f2: CallbackWithStr[...] = cb  # Error

Reviewer 2: I think you should also provide a simple example which just directly uses `Concatenate` without an intermediary `ParamSpec`. I had to read this example a couple of times, to convince myself that these examples are sufficient to illustrate that `Concatenate[int, ...]` also behaves in this way.
```suggestion
If ``...`` is used with signature concatenation, the ``...`` portion continues
to mean "any conceivable set of parameters that could be compatible"::

    type CallbackWithInt[**P] = Callable[Concatenate[int, P], str]
    type CallbackWithStr[**P] = Callable[Concatenate[str, P], str]

    def func(cb: Callable[[int, str], str]) -> None:
        f1: Callable[Concatenate[int, ...], str] = cb # OK
        f2: Callable[Concatenate[str, ...], str] = cb # Error
        f3: CallbackWithInt[...] = cb  # OK
        f4: CallbackWithStr[...] = cb  # Error
```

        def __call__(self, **kwargs: float) -> None: ...

    def func(no_args: NoKwargs, int_kwargs: IntKwargs, float_kwargs: FloatKwargs):
        f1: NoKwargs = int_kwargs  # OK
        f2: NoKwargs = float_kwargs  # OK

        f3: IntKwargs = no_args  # Error: missing **kwargs parameter
        f4: IntKwargs = float_kwargs  # OK

        f5: FloatKwargs = no_args  # Error: missing **kwargs parameter
        f6: FloatKwargs = int_kwargs  # Error: float is not subtype of int

If a callable ``B`` has a signature with one or more keyword-only parameters,
a callable ``A`` is a subtype of ``B`` if ``A`` has a ``**kwargs`` parameter
whose type is a supertype of the types of any otherwise-unmatched keyword-only
parameters in ``B``::

    class KwOnly(Protocol):
        def __call__(self, *, a: int, b: str) -> None: ...

    class IntKwargs(Protocol):
        def __call__(self, **kwargs: int) -> None: ...

    class IntStrKwargs(Protocol):
        def __call__(self, **kwargs: int | str) -> None: ...

    class StrKwargs(Protocol):
        def __call__(self, *, a: int, **kwargs: str) -> None: ...

    class Standard(Protocol):
        def __call__(self, a: int, b: str) -> None: ...

>     def func(int_args: IntKwargs, int_str_kwargs: IntStrKwargs, str_kwargs: StrKwargs):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    def func(int_kwargs: IntKwargs, int_str_kwargs: IntStrKwargs, str_kwargs: StrKwargs):
```
(And also below)

        f1: KwOnly = int_args  # Error: str is not subtype of int
        f2: KwOnly = int_str_kwargs  # OK
        f3: KwOnly = str_kwargs  # OK
        f4: IntStrKwargs = str_kwargs  # Error: int | str is not subtype of str

>         f5: IntStrKwargs = int_str_kwargs  # OK

Reviewer: Redundant since `int_str_kwargs` is already of type `IntStrKwargs`.

    cb1 = lambda x: str(x)  # OK
    cb1 = lambda : ""  # OK

    cb2: Callable[[], str] = cb1  # OK

A ``...`` can also be used with ``Concatenate``. In this case, the parameters
prior to the ``...`` are required to be present in the input signature and
be compatible in kind and type, but any additional parameters are permitted::

    cb3: Callable[Concatenate[int, ...], str]
    cb3 = lambda x: str(x)  # OK
    cb3 = lambda a, b, c: str(a)  # OK
    cb3 = lambda : ""  # Error
    cb3 = lambda *, a: str(a)  # Error

If the input signature in a def statement includes both a ``*args`` and
``**kwargs`` parameter and both are typed as ``Any`` (explicitly or implicitly
because it has no annotation), a type checker should treat this as the
equivalent of ``...``. Any other parameters in the signature are unaffected
and are retained as part of the signature::

    def func1(*args: Any, **kwargs: Any) -> None:
        pass

    def func2(a: int, /, *args, **kwargs) -> None:
        pass

    def func3(a: int, *args: Any, **kwargs: Any) -> None:
        pass

    class Proto1[**P](Protocol):
        def __call__(self, a: int, *args: P.args, **kwargs: P.kwargs) -> None: ...

>     assert_type(func1, Callable[..., None])  # OK

Reviewer: I think a reasonable type checker could reject this call on the grounds that it knows `func1` is an instance of the concrete function type, rather than a generic callable. Function objects have several attributes that callables in general don't.

Safer (but clunkier) ways to demonstrate the behavior could include the override example below, and defining a callback protocol that takes `*args: Any, **kwargs: Any`.

    def func(cb: Callable[[int, str], str]) -> None:
        f1: Callable[Concatenate[int, ...], str] = cb # OK
        f2: Callable[Concatenate[str, ...], str] = cb # Error
        f3: CallbackWithInt[...] = cb  # OK
        f4: CallbackWithStr[...] = cb  # Error

.. _`callback-protocols`:

Callback protocols
------------------

Protocols can be used to define flexible callback types that are impossible to
express using the ``Callable`` special form as specified :ref:`above <callable>`.
This includes keyword parameters, variadic parameters, default argument values,
and overloads. They can be defined as protocols with a ``__call__`` member::

  from typing import Protocol

  class Combiner(Protocol):
      def __call__(self, *args: bytes, max_len: int | None = None) -> list[bytes]: ...

  def good_cb(*args: bytes, max_len: int | None = None) -> list[bytes]:
      ...
  def bad_cb(*args: bytes, max_items: int | None) -> list[bytes]:
      ...

  comb: Combiner = good_cb  # OK
  comb = bad_cb  # Error! Argument 2 has incompatible type because of
                 # different parameter name and kind in the callback

Callback protocols and ``Callable[...]`` types can generally be used

> interchangeably.

Author: Yes, I agree this is a topic that needs discussion. I don't talk about method binding at all in this group of changes. I think the topic of methods (instance, class, static) and how they are meant to bind deserves its own section — probably an entire chapter. It's on my list.

> interchangeably.

Author: Here's another area that is completely unspecified currently that leads to subtle differences between callback protocols and `Callable`: https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/issues/7782.

    class IntStrKwargs(Protocol):
        def __call__(self, **kwargs: int | str) -> None: ...

    class StrKwargs(Protocol):
        def __call__(self, *, a: int, **kwargs: str) -> None: ...

    class Standard(Protocol):
        def __call__(self, a: int, b: str) -> None: ...

    def func(int_kwargs: IntKwargs, int_str_kwargs: IntStrKwargs, str_kwargs: StrKwargs):
        f1: KwOnly = int_kwargs  # Error: str is not subtype of int
        f2: KwOnly = int_str_kwargs  # OK
        f3: KwOnly = str_kwargs  # OK
        f4: IntStrKwargs = str_kwargs  # Error: int | str is not subtype of str
        f5: IntStrKwargs = int_kwargs  # Error: int | str is not subtype of int
        f6: StrKwargs = int_str_kwargs  # OK
        f7: StrKwargs = int_kwargs  # Error: str is not subtype of int
        f8: IntKwargs = int_str_kwargs  # OK
        f9: IntKwargs = str_kwargs  # Error: int is not subtype of str
        f10: Standard = int_str_kwargs  # Error: Does not accept positional arguments
        f11: Standard = str_kwargs  # Error: Does not accept positional arguments

Subtyping relationships for callable signatures that contain a ``**kwargs``

> with an unpacked ``TypedDict`` are described in the section :ref:`above <unpack-kwargs>`.

Reviewer: Perhaps part of that section should be moved here, but that can wait for another day.

The ``Callable`` special form supports the use of ``...`` in place of the
list of parameter types. This indicates that the type is consistent with
any input signature. Just as ``Any`` means "any conceivable type that could be
compatible", ``(...)`` means "any conceivable set of parameters that could be
compatible"::

    cb1: Callable[..., str]
    cb1 = lambda x: str(x)  # OK
    cb1 = lambda : ""  # OK

    cb2: Callable[[], str] = cb1  # OK

A ``...`` can also be used with ``Concatenate``. In this case, the parameters
prior to the ``...`` are required to be present in the input signature and
be compatible in kind and type, but any additional parameters are permitted::

    cb3: Callable[Concatenate[int, ...], str]
    cb3 = lambda x: str(x)  # OK
    cb3 = lambda a, b, c: str(a)  # OK
    cb3 = lambda : ""  # Error
    cb3 = lambda *, a: str(a)  # Error

> If the input signature in a def statement includes both a ``*args`` and

Reviewer 3: def statement -> function definition ?

Reviewer: That would be better since one could argue that an `async def` is not a def statement.
```suggestion
If the input signature in a function definition includes both a ``*args`` and
```
